# google-career-cert-capstone-bike-share
This is the final project which summarizes the the google career certificate in track of the data analytics

We were provided with csv files dated between year of 2017 and 2021 and each file represented one month. We had to choose any twelve month worth of data and analyze it. Of Course any raw data has to go through the process prior to the analyzing step, and afterall provide us with insights for answering further questions. 

Any raw data needs to get cleaned, to avoid bias, missing fields, get rid of repetition, and keep it consistent etc.  My first choice of tools were Google’s sheet which is an analog of MS excel. I chose it, because of its accessibility and simplicity being a cloud based solution, which does not require installation and license to use it. But as the saying goes you get what you are paying for. And here we are trying to upload approximately  1 GB of data total and of course google's product cannot handle it and the browser's window just keeps crashing. Then I decided to do it month by month and in the first ten minutes I realized how time consuming it would be. Since I am a linux machine user I have discovered that my machine has free open source tools, including spreadsheets which are called “LibreOffice”. It was doing the job, but it was a lot of data even for the desktop based version and it was a pretty slow process, and some functions would not get executed for the whole data set. 
I quickly moved on to another tool which was google’s “Big Query”. And again you get what you pay for, the free version which is also known as a sandbox comes with a surprise when users discover that we are allowed to upload files upto 100mb (which is different from case to case, because I was able to upload ~115mb file that one time). The majority of the files were close to 140mb on average. By reading posts on google's  career certificate forum, I figured out two things, (1) people post questions and never come back for the answers also they post question without even looking for already existing response, (2) almost everybody gave up on google's big query option as they could not upload files in to it. My solution for this was simple: every big file I would upload to my “LibreOffice” free open source spreadsheet software and split the file in two pieces by selecting the last half of it and using the cut function and paste it into the new file. This is how I bypassed Google's big query-free version restrictions. The next obstacle was a schema (a term which is familiar to the crowd who works with databases). Schema is the layout of how data is organized inside the database. When schema is different it wont let you combine datasets together. As I mentioned previously free version allows to upload upto 100mb at the time, therefore I uploaded several files and then tried to combine them/ merge them together but some files had different schema, in my case schema would have different data types for example in some file Date would be a string data type and in others it would integers. When you get stuck by doing technical stuff especially, search engine is your best friend and luckily for me I discovered a function that can change data type and it supposed to solve my issue, but unfortunately this function would not be executed in the sandbox (free version) and I did not bother to update to the paid version and just jumped onto the next tool. 
My next tool and my last hope, was R-studio which is for any activity that involves data manipulation and statistics. I have to mention it comes with great visualization tools. I felt anxious. I have to admit that, because if this would not work I would have to figure out something else. Murphy's law says, If something bad can happen, it's going to happen. There was no R-studio desktop version for linux, MacOs and Windows only, on their website. In order to install software on linux we use the command line instead of GUI - graphic user interface. I found that I can actually download the desktop version but I had to go the extra mile in order to obtain it. I had to do the whole tutorial and at the end It would not launch R-studio because different versions of packages were conflicting with each other and countless numbers of the error codes would just flood my screen. Again after spending some time on the internet I found a solution, which was easy. All I have to do is to update my system up to the latest version but it comes with a trick. I had to go through every update that I have missed, with the risk of losing files. Long story short, it took about three and half hours to complete this step. After all, when R-studio was running, It felt like I hit a jackpot, I experienced happiness, and finally I could perform my study. The rest was easy, R-studio in combination with my machine's computational power is literally the beast, fans of my laptop were working at the top of their capacity, trying to cool down hardware. It was so loud, if I would close my eyes it was giving the impression of standing next to the jet's turbine if you allow me to exaggerate. 

At theend when a clean data file was created for further analyses, I uploaded to tableau for creating visualizations. Tableau public which is the version could not really handle my 800 mb file of the clean data. It was taking between 3-5 minutes to process every step I was taking. When I tried to switch to desktop version I encuntered another problem, there is no desktop version for Linux system. I had to go an extra mile one more time. Thanks to oracle, in such a case scenario we can use a virtual machine, which allows us to have another operation system which uses your computer resources. I had a copy of windows ten which i obtained through my college's license for free. Aafter installing it to the windows on my virtual machine I jumped into the process creating visuals. But the main question is, how to convert casual riders into the regular subscribers. 
I found several interesting findings. (1) There is direct relation between weather and high demand. The best demand for services were in the warm month between end of April and mid of September and that in general for both groups casualriders and regular. Casual riders would have higher demand over regular riders on weekends. And if we take casual riders only 494344 rides started in downtown nearby tourist attraction areas which indicates the majority of these riders are not from Chicago and should not be considered as target audience for ad campaign. But the rest of casual riders which is 755090 started their trips outside of the downtown and evenly spreaded out throughout the entire city. This number represent the potential target group with margin error about 10%. My suggestion would be running digital ads targeting by zip code and another way is to run promotion or list the benefits why membership with the company is the best option by advertising at the docks. 



